Home » Python » File Handling » Python Count Number of Files in a Directory
Python Count Number of Files in a Directory
Updated on: January 19, 2022 | 3 Comments

In this article, we will see how to count the number of files present in a directory in Python.

If the directory contains many files and you want to count the number of files present in a directory before performing any operations.
For example, you want to move all files from one directory to another.
Still, before moving them,
 we can count how many files are present in a directory to understand its impact and the time required to perform that operation.

There are multiple ways to count files of a directory. We will use the following four methods.

Table of contents
How to count Files in a directory
Example: Count Number Files in a directory
Count all files in the directory and its subdirectories
scandir() to count all files in the directory
fnmatch module to count all files in the directory

How to count Files in a directory
Getting a count of files of a directory is easy as pie! Use the listdir() and isfile() functions of an
os module to count the number of files of a directory. Here are the steps.

Import os module
The os module provides many functions for interacting with the operating system.
Using the os module, we can perform many file-related operations such as moving, copying, renaming, and deleting files.

create a counter variable
Set counter to zero. This counter variable contains how many files are present in a directory.

Use os.listdir() function
The os.listdir('path') function returns a list of files and directories present in the given directory.

Iterate the result
Use for loop to Iterate the entries returned by the listdir() function. Using for loop we will iterate each entry returned by the listdir() function.

Use isfile() function and increment counter by 1
In each loop iteration, use the os.path.isfile('path') function to check whether the current entry is a file or directory.
If it is a file, increment the counter by 1.